# Indexing

Suppose we have a simple query:

```sql
SELECT *
FROM Users
WHERE Name = 'Mike'
```

Now think back to our Big-O discussion from last week and consider the
time complexity for this query. If we have a table of 100 rows, it's
going to have to check every one of those rows for the name `'Mike'`.
This is referred to as a "table scan" and is `O(n)` time complexity. Now
imagine that we actually have ten million users, and that we're making
that query 100 times/sec. Our database is going to crash, our website
will go down in flames, and our bosses will fire our sorry,
non-optimizing behinds.

This is why it's important to index columns that are heavily used for
lookups in queries. When you index a column, it creates a sorted data
structure with pointers to the actual table. Since it's sorted, lookups
can use binary search, which as you recall runs in `O(log n)` time. Log
base 2 of 10 million is about 23, so as you can imagine, this improves
database performance (and our career prospects) *dramatically*.

Remember though, before you go all index happy, that indices do have a
cost. They make writes (`INSERT`s, `DELETE`s, and `UPDATE`s) a little
more taxing because the index must be updated. Furthermore,
optimizations made outside of the bottleneck are no optimizations at
all. So it's important to index the *right* things, or you might as well
have indexed *nothing*.

On that note, **foreign keys** are pretty much always a good choice for
indexing because they're frequently used in both `WHERE` clauses and in
`JOIN` conditions, both of which can be incredibly taxing when not
indexed.

## Indexing a Foreign Key

Now let's consider a practical example.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  has_many :conversations, foreign_key: :user_id
end

class Conversation < ApplicationRecord
  belongs_to :user, foreign_key: :user_id
end   
```

Given a `Conversation`, we can quickly lookup a `User` because
`users.id` is the primary key, and the `primary key` is indexed by
definition. But what about `User#conversations`?

`#conversations` is matching on the foreign key column
`conversations.user_id`. Only primary keys come indexed out of the box,
so the generated query (`SELECT * FROM conversations WHERE user_id = ?`)
will require a full table scan. With a lot of conversations, this could
prove perilous for our career.

The solution is to add an index in an ActiveRecord migration. We'll use the [`add_index`][add-index-docs] method:

```ruby
class AddUserIdIndexToConversations < ActiveRecord::Migration[5.1]
  def change
    add_index :conversations, :user_id
  end
end
```

That's all! Run the migration and watch your queries speed up like a rocket ship!

[add-index-docs]: http://apidock.com/rails/ActiveRecord/ConnectionAdapters/SchemaStatements/add_index
